---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "#100 - Wrap up of 100 Days DX"
date: 2019-11-06 03:32:44
image: '/assets/img/day100/blog.png'
description: "The biggest open resource on Developer eXperience so far."
handles: "" 
tags:
- DX 
- Flow state
- Research
categories:
- DX
- 100DaysDX
twitter_text: "#100 - Wrap up of 100 Days DX"
---

## Why did I do it? 

This question has been posed to me couple of times. There's two reasons. I've been interested about DX for some years now. I started writing a book about DX around Oct 2018. The landing page for the book is still online. I just got stuck and there was always an excuse why I don't have time to write. Some of the material in this blog is from that time as well. I had to have a different method to get the book material written. 

I initially wrote some articles to LinkedIn and Medium. Medium has been acting up and putting walls for the content so an alternative had to be found. LinkedIn is somewhat easy and great place to write content, but still the audience is biased. My solution was to get a dedicated domain. I've done a few sites with Jekyll and I found a good foundation from Github. There you go, all that I need. Write the posts as markdown files in github and let the jekyll handle all with Github. 

The 100 days idea was borrowed from UX field. A friend of mine has done 100 Days Design challenge some time ago and I though to mimic the idea. Just write a post every day for 100 days. That would force me to do some writing and reading every day. The result is around 380 pages of raw material for the book. I just need editor to help me in converting it to a book. 

IMAGE HERE ABOUT STATS

## Biggest discoveries

While writing every day there's no time for retropectives or more detailed analysis of findings. Even now I'm not ready to write the "big conclusions" chapter. I need time and I need to read couple of times with thought what the hell did I write. When you are writing every day after the normal work in the evenings, you just want to find the topic fast and then write it. Anyway, here's a few things that have already surfaced from the experience. 

## 1. 

## 2. 

## 3. 


## What I regret

Regret that I was not able to engage developers more to the discussions around the topics. That requires time and resources, but it was the best part without a doubt. I can so vividly remember the discussions in Twitter. Without doubt that was the best part of this project. As a research method I can recommend it. Engaging the people you write about is the best way to get empirical information. It might be hard to get people engaged, but you need to get the first developers and after that others will join. I knew some developers so well that I boldly just tagged them into to the post/questions. That worked really well. If you want to see those discussions, you can find most of them by following #100daysdx hashtag.  

## Would I do it again or recommend to others? 

Yes! and no... Be prepared that you will most likely have obstacles in writing every day. You will get sick or something else. Put your priorities in order. Family and health are more important than writing. I had to breaks in the writing. First one was weekend with wife watching track and field competition in Stockholm. Second break was longer due to pneumonia. It took me 4 weeks to get well, but I did resume writing before that. 

It's 100 days and that it is a long time! Don't be too hard on yourself. If it requires to take a break, then do it and continue after that. 

## What about now? 

The site will stay up for now. The source is in Github and served as github pages so the only cost for me is the domain. One marvelous thing happened after the summer. I think was around post 40 oor something. It became clear to me that I want to do more research on DX and write my second PhD. I will concentrate on the economical aspects of the developer experience. 