---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "#39 - Subscribe or die"
date: 2019-08-20 03:32:44
image: '/assets/img/day39/blog.png'
description: ""
handles: "" 
tags:
- DX 
- 100DaysDX
- Discipline
- Business model
- Subscribe

categories:
- DX
- 100DaysDX
twitter_text: "#39 - Subscribe or die"
---

I was reading the book *Subscribed: Why the Subscription Model Will Be Your Company's Future - and What to Do About It* and had a slack online meeting with a team building World app for our platform. With that app consumers or subscribers of the platform can view and manipulate visually the data space they have access to. 

The book by the way is awesome, well written, entertaining yet informative. I've been sucked into subscription thinking already by some years ago, but I wanted to read the book and get new ideas and more thorough understanding of it. 

We started with REST APIs which use the old fashion push/pull polling. The application must be active and ask for updates periodically. They have no idea if there's an update on data or not, they just check and possibly pull new data based that. Now if the idea on subscription model familiar to us from Netflix, Dropbox, Amazon Prime, Fender Play and many others, it becomes obvious that subscription model is less of a hassle for applications as well.  

Previously pub/sub has been the term I've used, but now I learned from the team that websub is the thing we are going to. The concept is pretty much the same and the result for the API consumer is 99% the same. It reduces the barrier, it makes things a lot easier. In addition to that popular frameworks like Node.js have build-in support for data subscription approach. It reacts to changes and in that websub/hooks and such technologies fit in perfectly.  